DOC-887: SSH usernames (#5091)
spectrocloud/librarium: docs/docs-content/clusters/cluster-management/ssh-keys/ssh-usernames.md

  available in Palette."
icon: ""
hide_table_of_contents: false
sidebar_position: 11
---

This page lists the Secure Shell (SSH) user names created on Kubernetes nodes, which vary by provider and operating
system.

These user names are relevant when using [SSH key pairs](./ssh-keys.md) with your Palette host clusters.

## Public Cloud

### Infrastructure Provider

| Provider       | Operating System Pack | SSH Username |
| -------------- | --------------------- | ------------ |
| **AWS IaaS**   | **Ubuntu**            | `ubuntu`     |
| **AWS IaaS**   | **CentOS**            | `centos`     |
| **Azure IaaS** | **Ubuntu**            | `ubuntu`     |
| **Azure IaaS** | **CentOS**            | `centos`     |
| **GCP IaaS**   | **Ubuntu**            | `ubuntu`     |
| **GCP IaaS**   | **CentOS**            | `centos`     |

### Managed Kubernetes

| Provider      | Operating System Pack          | SSH Username |
| ------------- | ------------------------------ | ------------ |
| **AWS EKS**   | **Amazon EKS optimized Linux** | `ec2-user`   |
| **Azure AKS** | **Linux**                      | `azureuser`  |

> | **GCP GKE**   | **Container-Optimized OS**     | N/A          |

Reviewer: N/A seems a bit contradictory to the section below. Maybe we can say something like? "Refer to the SSH Configuration on GCP GKE section"

#### SSH Configuration on GCP GKE

It is not possible to configure GCP GKE clusters with an SSH key during cluster creation. If SSH access to your GCP GKE
nodes is critical, consider one of the following options:

- Configure project or node-level metadata to include your SSH key. Refer to
  [Predefined and custom metadata keys](https://cloud.google.com/compute/docs/metadata/overview#predefined-and-custom-metadata-keys)
  for guidance.

- Enable OS Login and associate your SSH key with your IAM identity. Refer to
  [How OS Login works](https://cloud.google.com/compute/docs/oslogin#how_os_login_works) for guidance.

> - Customize startup scripts or metadata to add your SSH key during node creation in a managed instance group. Refer to

Reviewer: @benradstone How would a user do this with Palette? The OS and k8s packs for GKE don't allow customization. Is an add-on profile the only option? Might be something we ask the cloud team.

  [Using startup scripts on Linux VMs](https://cloud.google.com/compute/docs/instances/startup-scripts/linux) for
  guidance.

## Data Center

| Provider           | Operating System Pack | SSH Username |
| ------------------ | --------------------- | ------------ |
| **MAAS**           | **Ubuntu**            | `ubuntu`     |
| **Openstack**      | **Ubuntu**            | `ubuntu`     |
| **VMware vSphere** | **Ubuntu**            | `ubuntu`     |
| **VMware vSphere** | **CentOS**            | `centos`     |

> 

Reviewer: @benradstone I think we need to call out BYOOS scenarios. There are two ways to use BYOOS. 

1)Through the default kubernets image builder project, which we have documented [here](https://docs.spectrocloud.com/byoos/image-builder/build-image/).

2) For vSphere, it's a bit different as we have added some custom logic and wrapped our own solution with the kubernetes images builder project. Check this section [out](https://docs.spectrocloud.com/byoos/image-builder/build-image-vmware/).

My guess is the default SSH username is a default value in one of the Packer config files.

Author: It looks like this is defined in the [pack.json](https://github.com/spectrocloud/pax/blob/master/stable/os/byoi_generic/pack.json#L10) for the BYOOS pack.

---
sidebar_label: "SSH Usernames"
title: "SSH Usernames"
description:
  "A list of the Secure Shell (SSH) usernames created on Kubernetes nodes for each provider and operating system pack
  available in Palette."
icon: ""
hide_table_of_contents: false
sidebar_position: 11
---

> This page lists the Secure Shell (SSH) user names created on Kubernetes nodes, which vary by provider and operating
> system.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This page lists the Secure Shell (SSH) user names created on Kubernetes nodes, which vary by provider and Operating System (OS).
```

We can define the acronym here and use it throughout the text.

nodes is critical, consider one of the following options:

- Configure project or node-level metadata to include your SSH key. Refer to
  [Predefined and custom metadata keys](https://cloud.google.com/compute/docs/metadata/overview#predefined-and-custom-metadata-keys)
  for guidance.

- Enable OS Login and associate your SSH key with your IAM identity. Refer to
  [How OS Login works](https://cloud.google.com/compute/docs/oslogin#how_os_login_works) for guidance.

## Data Center

| Provider           | Operating System Pack | SSH Username |
| ------------------ | --------------------- | ------------ |
| **MAAS**           | **Ubuntu**            | `ubuntu`     |
| **Openstack**      | **Ubuntu**            | `ubuntu`     |
| **VMware vSphere** | **Ubuntu**            | `spectro`    |
| **VMware vSphere** | **CentOS**            | `spectro`    |

## Edge

This is dependent on the operating system you provide for your edge hosts using either
[Agent Mode](../../../deployment-modes/agent-mode/agent-mode.md) or
[EdgeForge](../../../clusters/edge/edgeforge-workflow/palette-canvos/build-provider-images.md).

> ## Bring Your Own OS (BYO-OS)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Bring Your Own OS 
```
We try to avoid using acronyms in headings -https://spectrocloud.atlassian.net/wiki/spaces/DE/pages/1765933057/Spectro+Cloud+Internal+Style+Guide#Headings

> You can select **Bring Your Own OS (BYO-OS)** as the operating system (os) pack for your cluster in Palette. The default

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can select **Bring Your Own OS (BYOOS)** as the OS pack for your cluster in Palette. The default
```

Marketing and product has said to use BYOOS. Eng didn't listen which is why we have a different title

> SSH username will depend on the operating system image that you have built. Refer to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
SSH username will depend on the OS image that you have built. Refer to
```

[Bring Your Own OS (BYOOS)](../../../byoos/byoos.md) for further guidance on building custom images.

- For images built using the [Kubernetes Image Builder](../../../byoos/image-builder/build-image.md), the SSH username
  is defined as the value for `ssh_username` in the corresponding operating system JSON file. For example, the
  [Amazon Linux 2 JSON](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/image-builder/blob/main/images/capi/packer/ami/amazon-2.json#L11)
  sets the `ssh_username` value as `ec2-user`.

>   If `ssh_username` is not defined in the operating system JSON, then `root` is set by default.

Author: ```suggestion
  If `ssh_username` is not defined in the operating system JSON, then `root` is set by the **Bring Your Own OS (BYOOS)** pack.
```
